# namepopularity
A lot of data on the popularity of first names in the US by year, broken down by state

In this project, I produce comparisons of the popularity of names for babies born in the US for different years and different US states. Sometimes the data will be visualized--probably in the form of maps--but other analyses won't lend themselves to visualization.

Data come from multiple sources. I've primarily used three types:
1. CSV files, one for each US state. The files' rows are in the format: AK,F,1910,Mary,14. That is: a two-letter state abbreviation; the child's sex; year; given (first) name; number of occurrences of that name, with that sex, in that state in that year. Each file contains data only for one state, from the years 1910 to 2017, inclusive. All names with at least five birth occurrences in the state that year are included.
2. US government publications, digitized to PDFs, comprising reports on natality (as well as marriage and sometimes fatality) in the United States for that year. The documents I use provide counts of the number of births that year for each state, broken down by male and female births. Although the documents continue to be published, these figures seem to be included only before 1995. I have not yet determined how long ago these documents go back, but a quick search seems to show them available at least as far back as 1939.
3. For 1995 and years since then, I rely on CSV files from <https://data.nber.org/data/vital-statistics-natality-data.html>. These CSV files are quite large; each file contains one row for every birth in the US for a specific year. Each row includes a lot of data unused for this project, and the order of the data in these files depends on the year. Because counts are not actually provided, I have written scripts to read these files and count the number of babies born for each state/sex combination.

The primary data analysis is done in Python in scripts with filenames of the type: 2000FwGimp.py (that file looks at births of females in 2000). These files read files described as source type (1) above and, for each name found in the source type (1) files, calculate the frequency of that name in all births of that sex, in that state (for example, Jacob in Alaska, 0.014857). The program then compares these proportions across states and calculates their standard deviation. Finally, we calculate the percentage of the standard deviation for each state's frequency. What this produces is the relative popularity of a name across all the states. That is, we see where the name was popular, without regard to how popular the name was in absolute terms; we are emphasizing the difference between states.

Python code is then generated for visualization with the free, open-source image editor GIMP. In these visualizations, a map of the US is produced for each name in each year, with each state's color corresponding to the popularity of the name in that state compared to other states. More specifically, the percentage of the standard deviation we calculated is converted into a color value, with intervals of 50% of a standard deviation. All values above 200% and below -200% are grouped together.

I plan to add more functionality to these scripts in the near future!
